WEBVTT
Kind: captions
Language: en

We all want to have a good stable relationship
with somebody and one of the problems with

early stage intense feelings of romantic love
is that it’s part of the oldest parts of

the brain that become activated.

Brain regions linked with drive, with craving,
with obsession, with motivation.

And in fact some cognitive regions up I the
prefrontal cortex that have evolved much more

recently begin to shut down.

Brain regions linked with decision making,
planning ahead, you know, people who are madly

in love can fall madly in love with somebody
who’s married who lives on the other side

of the planet, who comes from a different
religion and somehow they’ll say to themselves

we’ll work it out.

We can work this out because of all that energy
of intense romantic love and also the shutting

down of various brain systems like with decision
making.

So one of the things that I say to people
is, you know, before you decide to marry somebody

spend some, a good deal of time with them
so that some of that early stage intense feelings

of romantic love can begin to subside and
you can begin to really see what you’ve

got.

As a matter of fact I’m very optimistic
about the future of relationships because

we’re spending so much time now getting
to know somebody before we wed.

You know a great many people are having these
one night stands and friends with benefits

and living together before they marry.

And there was a recent study in which they
asked a lot of single people who were living

together with somebody why have they not yet
married.

And 67 percent were terrified of divorce,
terrified of the – not only the legal and

the financial and the economic but the personal
and social fallout of divorce.

And so I began to realize maybe all of this
hooking up and friends with benefits and living

together is not recklessness.

Maybe it’s caution.

Maybe singles are trying to learn every single
thing they can about a potential partner before

they tie the knot.

And in short marriage used to be the beginning
of a relationship, now it’s the finale.

And I think that that is very positive.

As a matter of fact I work with Match.com.

I’m their senior, their chief scientific
advisor.

And we did a study of married people not on
the site Match.com of course of 1,100 married

people.

And I had reason well if there’s this long
precommitment stage of getting to know somebody

maybe by the time you walk down the aisle
you know what you’ve got, you’re happy

with what you’ve got and you’re going
to build a long stable really happy marriage.

Maybe we’re going towards a time of happier
marriages because relationships can end before

you tie the knot.

So within this study I asked these 1,100 married
people a lot of questions but one of the questions

was would you remarry the person you’re
currently married to?

And 81 percent said yes.

And I think that with what I call fast sex,
slow love with this slow love process of getting

to know somebody very carefully over a long
period of time it’s going to help the brain

readjust some of these brain regions for decision
making.

You’re going to get to know how this person
handles your parents at Christmas or whatever

holiday, you know.

How they handle your friends.

How they handle their money.

How they handle an argument.

How they handle getting exercise and their
own health and your health, et cetera.

You learn a lot about the person.

I think we’re in a – I’m very optimistic
about the future because of this concept of

slow love.

I’m not really in the advice business or
the should business.

I think people should marry when they feel
like marrying.

But from what I know about the brain if it
were me I’d wait at least two years because

in two years you see the full cycle of the
year twice.

You see how they handle Halloween, how they
handle Christmas or Hanukkah, how they handle

summer fun.

And to see that twice is I think important.

And by the way, you can sustain that intense
feeling of romantic love for two years.

I’ve studied 5,000 people through Match.com
not on the Match.com site.

A representative sample of Americans based
on the U.S. census and a great many of them

say that they’ve had the experience of sustained
feelings of intense romantic love for somebody

for two to five years.

So if you pick the right person and you know
now to sustain some of the joy I think you

can create a long term attachment that is
full also of periods of romantic love.

We all want to sustain a long term happy partnership
and psychologists will give you a long list

of smart ways to sustain it.

But I’d like to say what the brain can add.

I studied the brain and the first thing that
you want to do is sustain the three basic

brain systems for mating and reproduction.

Sex drive – have sex with the partner, have
sex regularly with the partner.

If you don’t have time schedule the time
to have sex with the partner because when

you have sex with a partner you’re driving
up the testosterone system so you’re going

to want to have more sex.

But you also have all the cuddling which is
going to drive up the oxytocin system and

give you feelings of attachment and having
sex with the person, any kind of stimulation

of the genitals drives up the dopamine system
and can sustain feelings of romantic love.

So basically having – and of course there
can be good jokes about it and relaxation

about it that is good for the body and the
mind.

So have sex with a person and sustain that
brain system of the sex drive.

To sustain feelings of intense romantic love
do novel things together.

Novelty drives up the dopamine system and
can sustain feelings of romantic love.

And this isn’t just in the bedroom.

Just go to a different restaurant on Friday
night.

Take your bicycle instead of a car.

Read to each other in bed.

Sit together on the couch and have a discussion
about something new.

Read new books together.

Novelty, novelty, novelty sustains feelings
of intense romantic love.

You also want to sustain feelings of deep
attachment and to do that you have to just

stay in touch.

Learn to sleep in the person’s arms, at
least start that way.

Cuddle after dinner.

Walk arm in arm down the street.

Hold hands together.

Put your foot on top of his foot or her foot
while you’re having dinner, gently of course.

But stay in touch.

That drives up the oxytocin system and can
give you feelings of deep attachment to the

partner.

So you want to sustain all three of those
brain systems – sex drive, feelings of romantic

love and feelings of deep attachment.

But we’ve also found out what’s going
on in the brain in long term happy partners.

We did a study, a brain scanning study of
people who were married an average of 21 years.

And those people who are married an average
of 21 years who are still madly in love with

their partner showed activity in three brain
regions.

A brain region linked with empathy, a brain
region linked with controlling your own emotions

and a brain region linked with what we call
positive illusions.

The simple ability but sometimes hard to overlook
what you don’t like about somebody and then

focus on what you do.

So last but not least we’ve now known that
if you say several nice things to your partner

every day – I would suggest five but if
you can only pull off two or three, whatever,

saying nice things to your partner.

That actually reduces their cholesterol, reduces
their cortisol which is the stress hormone

and boost their immune system.

But it also boosts yours.

So what the brain says about a happy, long
term partnership is overlook what you don’t

like and focus on what you do.

Express empathy for the partner.

Control your own emotions.

Have sex with the partner.

Do novel things together.

Stay in touch and say several nice things
every day and you will – your brain will

help you sustain a long-term deep attachment.

We’re built to love.

